alright guys it's time how are you guys
doing good did you guys have a good
summer
yeah no come on
are you excited about the new semester
yeah that's what I want to hear so by
the way did you know that this course is
going going to be a podcast video and
audio do I look okay thank you tell me
if you know my hair doesn't look so good
so we only want to show the best to the
worldwide audience you know so in case
you wondering this is math 53
multivariable calculus and this is my
name Edward Frenkel I am
I'm professor here at the math
department I've been here quite a while
actually and I've taught this course
right here in this room and I love this
I love this place so it's good to be
back and you all look great so you know
I feel good energy so now let's see
there are a few things that I want to
tell you about this course and then
we'll start then we'll start with the
material so what do I want to tell you
video podcast that's a great that's a
great thing so great resource for you we
also have other resources this is the
URL for for the course web page where
you can find in syllabus where it's
information about exams in search as
well as the assignment the reading and
homework assignments but roughly the way
it will work is that the homework
assignments will be due on mondays in
your sections although there is one
section which means on Tuesdays and
Thursdays
so I'm not going to repeat each time but
if I say Monday it means for that
section Tuesday alright not too
complicated
hold your question for a second ask me
later okay so homework assignments will
be due on Mondays except this coming
Monday so this coming Monday because
it's on the one class okay so schools
too short so then normally it would have
to be due the following Monday but the
following Monday's Labor Day okay so so
it's going to get much more comfortably
than this so you have to keep up okay
now this is actually easy to figure out
so so the very first homework assignment
will be due on Wednesday which is a week
from the coming Wednesday in your
sections okay and two Wednesday in this
case means Tuesday for for those
sections which meets on Tuesdays and
Thursdays but but this is the only
holiday now well there is another one
later on but let's not worry about it
so there isn't the only one on one now
there is one more month Monday maybe but
whenever it's not a holiday it will be
doing Monday's all right so that's
that's one thing you should know but
anyway all of the stuff is on the web
here and also on bSpace
so there is this thing now which is
called bSpace which you know you have to
forgive me because I haven't taught for
a couple years so I am new to this stuff
but it looks really cool and it's up and
running so you can all easily find it
and some of you have already I know and
it has lots of stuff so first of all it
has all the same stuff which is here but
also it has like chats and forums and
all the stuff so I encourage you all to
go there and discuss with your fellow
students and I'll be logging in every
once in awhile and answering questions
and things like that so you're welcome
also to ask me questions through that
through that space go through that be
space alright next this is the large
class as you can see okay and I
personally would like to accommodate
everyone
and actually with the video podcasts
that make it you know becomes more
realistic I suppose now
however I don't handle any enrollment
issues I would love to but I just have
no control over it so please don't ask
me about switching sections about moving
from the waitlist and etc I just don't
know anything about this all right there
is a person in the math department who
is in charge of this
her name is Barbara TV and please
address all these queries to her you can
find more detailed information about
coach here next we will have weekly
quizzes which will be administered in
sections we will have two midterm exams
and we'll have a final please check the
date I can tell you now October 1st and
November 5th are the midterms and the
final is on December 19th which is like
the last day of the exam session I know
but what can I do so and the grade the
please read the rest on the on my home
page I don't want to waste too much time
because all of this is there the grade
how the greatest drives and things like
that so now I think it will be
beneficial to everyone if we try to keep
the noise down okay and besides you know
there is competition to get into this
class so the worst offenders will be
replaced by people on the way on the
waitlist so be careful alright now what
else
homework I want to say about homeworks I
homework stuff which get pretty heavy
and this is intentional so don't you
know curse me and say okay is it give us
so many problems and so on is this just
for your for your own benefit okay the
more homework problems you do the better
you do in class in fact I might take
some of the problems on the midterms
from directly from homework so the more
time you spend on homework the better
chance you have of getting a good grade
now
are there any questions is that work for
the webcast for the webcast there is a
it's going to be there is a page on at
Berkeley which I will I will put there I
haven't put a link yet but I will
tonight okay once I will make sure that
it's up and running but it's also
YouTube and iTunes okay
so there are all kinds of ways to to
look at me if you don't get enough well
I wish the camera was pointing at you
but you know unfortunately there is only
one you know these days I just find
myself in front of the camera all the
time and you know what can I do what can
I do now
any other questions yes the two people
next to each other yeah office hours oh
yes it's all there but it's Tuesdays and
Thursdays after the class okay you have
a question is that what this side yeah
it does work no no no this math is
catalysed well why don't you do this
just go there and you will see a nice
picture of me and
and then there is a link to the because
if you try to do it
you might misspell it and somebody this
you should be able to spell or go there
and this will it will send you anything
else
yes quizzes yeah will be based on
homework and the working sections and
the lectures right not directly I mean
it's so going to be much more subtle but
it's based on the material yeah of
course it will be no tricks you know
whatever you learn here and in the book
and in the sections will be tested on
quizzes homework and exams
there is no we know three key questions
everything will be just from taking from
the kind of stuff what we do here yes
pop quizzes is what's the pop quiz it's
like a like unexpected now it's okay I
don't want to trick you into anything
you know it's all straightforward it's
all laid out for you you know from the
beginning and we'll just follow that
okay yes we're Evans Co but all this
information is on the web so since we
our time is limited I would love to
answer all the questions but I'll take
one more
if there is one okay you go I'm sorry
ask your your TA they will explain this
in more detail I'm sorry okay I will
instruct them to give you a better
answer
okay all right no don't worry well I'm
sorry
I hope so is it it's are we filming we
are
well hello world wide audience and
welcome to math 53
I think I'll cut the first part so
that's where we start so should we do it
again
let me tell you about this course so
this course is called multivariable
calculus and it is continuation of math
courses you've taken before or must have
taken before because there are
prerequisites for this course math 1a in
1b or equivalent in which you studied
single variable calculus okay so the
difference is that in this course we are
going to talk about objects which are
which live not in one dimension or like
functions in one variable but in two and
three dimensions
okay but we will build on the kind of
material that you learned in the
previous courses when you studied a
single variable calculus so that's the
first thing that I want to tell you the
second thing I want to tell you is that
what I will try to do in this in this in
these lectures is that I will try to
explain to you the main points and I
will give you examples ok don't expect
that I will cover 100% of the material
think of this lectures as a component of
the course and there are other
components our resources first of all
the book which is Stewart book
multivariable calculus you can either
use the custom Edition for UC Berkeley
which I prefer because it's lighter or
if you just happen to have the sixth
edition of this book I'm told it's ok
it's exact quality it's the same exactly
the same material so you might you might
you may use six edition so what I'm
going to do actually what I will try to
do is to cover to tell you the kind of
stuff that you will not find in
okk emphasize on the points if you don't
find in a book talk about the big
picture so to speak but of course my
time is limited so certain things which
I find it perhaps the simplest or the
easiest to understand you'll have to
learn on your own by reading the book or
in sections or by asking your TAS or
asking me okay so there are many
different resources and you should use
all of them and now there is those
bSpace and other stuff all right so so I
also encourage you to read ahead
actually I think that's a great idea
if you just read maybe even the
beginning of the section even if you
don't understand it when you come to the
lecture and I start to talk about this
stuff you will find it much easier to
absorb and to process okay so if you
have a chance to read it beforehand you
will do yourself a favor now
mathematics you know this course is a
beautiful course actually which I really
enjoy teaching and because it has a lot
of beautiful applications to all areas
of you know science engineering and
physics biology chemistry you name it in
other words there are many problems in
those areas which you cannot even
approach without using the kind of
material that we are going to study here
so it's really important ok but apart
from this I want to say that for me
personally I think it's also very
important to appreciate and to see and
appreciate the beauty of this material
and I know that the some of you it might
sound strange because mathematics and
beauty two things which are far away
perhaps you think but and I know because
that's the popular misconception and
also people think math is boring and you
know not interesting and it's sort of
all carved in stone and it doesn't
change and it's all been around for for
centuries which is all false ok it is
actually a live organism which is which
is moving which is growing all the time
you know every day there are dozens of
papers written by mathematicians around
the world every day there's some new
theory improved every day some new stuff
is discovered and some old stuff perhaps
disproved you know so it's really
really beautiful subject and I think one
of my purposes here and I'm one of my
goals is to unlock this beauty for you I
would like to show it to you I would
like to to prove it to you to prove it
to prove to you that it's not just that
we studied for convenience because we
need to solve some practical problems
but in fact it has inherent beauty of
itself mathematics okay so now I am
actually a practicing mathematician as
you as you might say in other words I do
I do my research and and I think that
puts me in a good position to actually
tell you about some of the things which
perhaps would not be so easily seen - a
kind of someone who doesn't do research
mathematical research on a regular basis
you are interested in what kind of stuff
I work on you can find information here
and now do you happy to talk to you
about this as well ok it's not an easy
course by any stretch of imagination and
I'm not promising to make it easy for
you it's hard you have to practice you
have to a lot of things you just have to
practice on and on and on
ok but what I do promise you is that I
will try to make it interesting for you
I will try to make it worth your time
here okay now what are what are the what
are the main topics of this course and I
want to kind of put it in perspective
and and to talk about the connection
between this course in the math courses
you have studied previously ok so you
kind of see the big picture the main
topics are we start
geometric objects which are now defined
in two and three dimensions so now what
are dimensions okay so this is something
which you know we learn from everyday
life one-dimensional fundament and
one-dimensional objects one-dimensional
objects are things which are like a line
or a curve Thanks which and which you
kind of can move only in one direction
so I'm just simplifying I'm giving you a
very rough definition intuitive
definition okay so if we didn't if we
didn't care about the thickness of this
wire we could say that twenty minutes
because you can only move this way but
you can't move in any other direction
okay so that's one-dimensional
what's the dimensional well this
blackboard is two-dimensional because I
can go this way I can go this way
someone might say you can also go this
way yeah but this is the kind of
superposition of moving in this
direction in this direction so there are
only two independent directions in fact
like this one and this okay and finally
this classroom is three dimensional okay
because in addition to you know we have
the length and width and height right so
that's three dimension here and also
there is time so actually the after
Einstein we know that you can't separate
space and time and in fact you should
think in terms of four-dimensional
space-time time is like a fourth
dimension which we can't really
visualize so easily but it's there right
so so that's the notion of dimension the
tile is talking about and we'll talk
about it more I just want to give you an
intuitive idea what dimension is and in
this course we will mostly work with
things things which are embedded in two
or three dimensional space in other
words the object themselves might have
dimension one two or three but they are
embedded in on the plane into a plane
like a blackboard or two-dimensional
space so that's the idea so what are
they what what kind of objects first the
the simplest ones at one dimensional
object which is like this wire if you
ignore the fact that it has some
thickness okay someone might say
actually there are also zero dimensional
objects maybe points just point that's
also a geometric object right
it doesn't have you can't move within it
to in any direction I'd yell I mean
idealize point no cellphones by the way
all right I don't don't mine and you
should do the same let's our worldwide
audience you know gets offended now but
points they're not so interesting right
they don't have inner structure so
that's why we start with one-dimensional
objects which are curved so we study
curves like this and where can a curve
live okay where can a curve live it can
live on the plane it can live in two
dimensions in other words in the
two-dimensional space or it can live in
the three-dimensional space like this
this wire you know it doesn't live in
any particular plane it is actually I
don't want to unroll it but you see what
I mean it is sort of it is embedded in
the three-dimensional space but not it
doesn't live in any particular plane in
that space so the first thing we'll
study a curve in two-dimensional
two-dimensional and three-dimensional
space space that's the first thing we'll
we'll talk about how to represent them
mathematically how to learn things about
them like tangents tangent lines and and
various surfaces areas that we can get
out of those curves okay
and what kind of formulas will help will
help us will facilitate a obtaining this
kind of result that's number one number
two next in line are surfaces surfaces
are two-dimensional object and because
they are two-dimensional they cannot
live in they most of them will not live
inside a plane because the only plane
which will live inside a plane will be
plane itself or maybe some piece of the
plane right so mold surface is the most
beautiful surfaces like like a sphere
they will live in the three-dimensional
space so surfaces will be in
three-dimensional space
and again we will we will talk about how
to represent them how to analyze them
and things like that that's the second
subject and not necessarily in that
order
I'm just kind of giving you a an
overview with the kind of logical in a
logical way rather than chronological
order now and the next we studied tools
of calculus what are the tools that -
that - in some sense opposite procedures
one is differentiation and the other one
is integration and of course you know
that because you you have studied that
but in the case of one dimension one
dimensional case for functions in one
variable and what we're going to do is
we're going to expand this two functions
in two and three variables so that we
can understand things which live in a
two dimensional and three dimensional
spaces so the first first comes the
differential calculus differential
calculus and this is about this is about
taking derivatives roughly it's about
taking derivatives geometrically it's
about finding tangent lines and tangent
planes and things like that it has very
important applications for example -
finding maximum minimum functions and
the second tool is integration just the
integration and that has to do with
finding things like volumes and surface
areas etc okay and then we'll talk about
the interplay between the two interplay
between the two so what do I mean by the
interplay I just want to tell you about
the kind of stuff that you talked about
in the math 1a 1b
in a single variable calculus in single
variable calculus
in single variable calculus you have
functions in one variable so you have
something like f of X we call it f of X
function in one variable for example f
of X is equal to y squared minus y plus
1 I'm sorry
x squared minus X port ok so it's a
function and on one variable and what
you learned you know in the single
variable calculus is that you can you
can differentiate it and you can
integrate it and so derivative F prime
of X has to do with the slope of the
tangent line so I'll just say roughly
tangent line okay and we also have the
integral of f of X DX and that has to do
with the area so if your function is
something like this and this is a and B
this is a graph of the function y x next
is y equals f of X what this integral
counts compute is the area under the
graph roughly okay so you see that these
are two completely different procedures
the derivative tells you about tangent
lines next time I'll bring color jokes
but so now it's just like this in other
words it tells you about what happens in
a very small scale around the particular
point here okay tangent lines but
integral can just about something global
it tells you what happened on the entire
interval from A to B you can find the
area under the graph for example so a
priori there is no connection between
the two procedures one is
differentiation one is integration and
so here comes the beauty which I
promised you the beauty is that these
two procedures are actually inverse
each other something which if you didn't
know about this you wouldn't you
wouldn't be able to see it right away
and people did not see it for many
centuries
it took some really you know big brains
to realize that and that's what we call
now the fundamental theorem of calculus
the mental theorem of calculus of single
variable calculus is the statement that
if you integrate the derivative of a
function you will get the values of the
function difference between the values
of the function in other words see you
first apply the derivative and then you
take the integral and you get back your
original function evaluated at the
endpoints so so what's beautiful here
what's beautiful is that is changing
that you can use procedure procedure
differentiation which a priori has
nothing to do with taking the taking the
area computing the area and use it to be
able to express to express this area in
a very simple way okay so a more
generally the way it's usually
formulated you say that if you have some
function if you put here some arbitrary
function G let's say oh well yeah and
this will be the antiderivative of this
function but that's the same thing
because that's just saying that that
that G of X is the derivative of so that
so that this is what we call the
antiderivative okay 90 degree so I have
summarized for you essentially the
entire single variable calculus and the
main the main result you know so what we
going to do is we are going to do
roughly we are going to do an analogue
of this but in two and three dimensions
and because we are now in two and three
dimensions it becomes much more
interesting because we can now integrate
not only over an interval if you are on
a line that's the only thing you can
integrate over over nine
now we are going to integrate integrate
over curves over surfaces and we're
going to relate different types of
integrals to different types of
derivatives and things like that so
that's what I mean about the interplay
between the two and it's going to be
really beautiful stuff Algy I'll give
you Alto he wants a story so I was
teaching this class and then one guy
told me that he was so fascinated by
this okay when he went home for
Thanksgiving he explained it to his
grandmother okay so so that was the best
compliment today that I could receive
but it is it is in fact when you get to
the bottom of it when you really start
understanding what it's all about the
structure the inner structure of it you
will appreciate the beauty of it and
that's what I will try to show you and
to unlock for you okay any questions so
so that's the outline that is that's the
rough
[Applause]
the raft picture of what we are going to
do throughout this semester so what
we're going to start now is we're going
to start a study curves first in two
dimensions and then later on we'll talk
about three dimensions so will gradually
build the theory starting with the
simple things and then going gradually
to something more complicated and so on
so forth and we're going to use the
intuition that we we gained by looking
at the simpler things okay and so we
have to start somewhere and we start
with curves on the plane so that's the
simplest object out of all of this which
we which we have discussed briefly here
curves curves on the plane so by a plane
I mean think of a geometric object which
you can think of as this at this
blackboard extend it to infinity in all
directions okay so usually usually to to
help us navigate this plane we introduce
the coordinate system on it right so
that once we do that every point gets a
name because every point now going to
have we're going to have a coordinate an
x coordinate usually we call it x and y
and it's going to have an x coordinate
maybe x0 I'm going to have a y
coordinate Y here so we can talk about a
point as being defined by by these two
coordinates it's like the address of
this point it's uniquely defined address
there's only one point which has this
address and conversely for any pair of
numbers X 0 y 0 you have a well-defined
point so that's that's the kind of
that's the way that we will talk about
points on the plane we'll think of them
in terms of their coordinates now very
soon we will learn other coordinate
systems we will learn other ways of
representing points for example polar
coordinates are coming up next week
we'll talk about that but for now we
will think of points as being
represented by by their coordinates X 0
and y 0 so now we've
how to represent point right so for
instance let's say let's say this is 1
and this is 2 and this is 3 and so on
right and this will be 1 2 and so on so
for example if you have a point with
coordinates 3 & 1 that's this point so
that's according to 3 1 first goes the
x-coordinate then goes the the
y-coordinate so now the question is how
do we do we represent a curve on this
plane and again what is the curve on
this plane well it's something as I can
draw with the chalk without sort of just
moving once you know without removing
removing the chalk from them from the
blackboard so that that's a curve okay
as opposed to you know something which I
would say yes 3por or something which I
would not be able to do in one stroke
how would we represent a curve and this
is a very important question because
already here you see the main tools for
representing geometric objects
mathematically that essentially are two
ways one is to write equations and the
other way is to parametrize parameterize
your object so two ways to represent one
is buying equation and second is in in
parametric form so what do I mean by
representing by an equation this is
actually something which we have already
which I have kind of used implicitly in
this discussion because I talked about
the graph of a function and what is the
graph of a function but a curve if you
look at this picture you see that curve
it is just like the kind of object that
I'm talking about here right and it sort
of goes without saying
after the single variable calculus that
a graph of a function in one variable is
such a curve on the plane right so in
other words let me erase this so let's
say one let's call this one and let's
call this two so for one an example
would be an equation like this y equals
f of X in other words it's a graph of
the function f of X so where's the
equation this is the equation when we
write this we are imposing a constraint
in other words we are not looking at all
points X Y but we are only looking at
the points which have the form X 0 say
for some X 0 and half of that X 0 so for
instance in this case if f of X is x
squared minus X minus 1 let's say if I
put X 0 to be equal to 2 say then f of X
0 is going to be 2 squared minus 2 minus
1 right which is 4 minus 2 minus 1 which
is 1 so that means that if X is 2 y has
to be 1 so this point is this point is
going to belong to our curve ok but this
point for example will not in other
words and no other point with x
coordinate 2 will belong to our curve
only the one for which the y coordinate
is equal to 2 this function f in which I
substitute this value so so so that's
what I mean by imposing the equation by
imposing the equation I mean considering
just the points X 0 y 0
which have this special relation that
the second coordinate is a given
function f like this function evaluated
at the first coordinate X 0 so when I
impose this condition I get a curve I
get in that that curve we call graph of
the function any questions like this so
graph of a function is this is the
simplest example of a curve in on the
plane and it is also it is represented
in the first form by an equation which
actually is a good time to talk about
how dimensions change depending on how
many equations and how many independent
variables we have because this is
something this is a point which I think
that could be confusing so there is sort
of a very important rule here you see I
start with two independent variables
namely x and y and I have one equation
right this I only have one equation so
the dimension of the object I get is the
difference between the two this is a
dimension of the object that I get so it
is indeed a curve and this is a general
rule a dimension of your object is the
difference between the number of
independent variables which in our
course going to be 2 or 3 minus the
number of equations you impose so here I
start with the plane so I only have two
variables and I have one equation so the
dimension is 1 I get a curve but more
January I could start with the
three-dimensional space right so if I
start with three-dimensional space this
is something we'll do later but I just
want to use it by way of showing that
the same formula works in much higher
generality if I start with a three
dimensional space then usually we put
coordinates XYZ so that's like our the
space of this of this classroom if I
impose one equation
I will get two so that going to be a
surface if on the other hand I put two
equations okay I'm going to get one
dimensional object which is a curve so
there's always this calculus this simple
formula the difference between the two
tells you the dimension okay so that's
the first way of representing that's not
the only way perhaps one more thing not
all course not all equations look like
this right it's a very special form of
an equation in which on on the left hand
side you have the variable Y and on the
right hand side you have something which
is independent of Y just depends on X
from the first variable you can have
equations which are not like this and
the simplest equation which is not like
this
maybe not the simplest but one of the
simplest equation is this equation do
you know what this represents circle
that's right so this is again one
equation which we write on two variables
x and y and the geometric object which
it represents is a circle of radius one
if I were to put here R squared for some
number R I would actually get a circle
of radius R so what does it mean when I
say that this equation represents a
circle it simply means that if on the
plane I look only at the points XY which
satisfy this equation then I will just
get the circle and nothing else that's
all I'm saying that's what I mean when I
say that this equation represents this
object so this is a very efficient way
to represent geometric object you can
represent graphs like parabola like in
this case but you can also represent a
circle which is actually not a graph of
a function because here you can't really
express very easily why you can try to
express Y in terms of in terms of X but
what you get is like Y squared is 1
minus x squared so you have to extract
the square root right and so it's not so
nice
because first of all there are two
square roots so it's kind of starts
looking ugly there are other ways to see
that this is not a graph of the function
but I don't want to get too much too
deep into this my point is that you can
write equations more general than y
equals f of X and this way you get more
general curves and that's all about the
first type of representation of a curve
in on the plane we can represent it by
an equation but the results the second
way which is equally important it's not
more important and that's called
parametric form and parametric form is
very nice intuitive explanations the
idea is that instead of trying to find
the constraint which x and y satisfy
like x squared plus y squared equals 1
we introduce an additional variable
which usually we call T like time and we
think of the curve at being traversed by
say a point or some mean a little object
a point like object and you can think of
this extra variable T as time and you
just look at the position of this object
on the plane as time goes by so at the
moment T equals 0 stays here at the
moment you know 1 second is here 2
second here and so on but really for any
for every value of T is going to be
somewhere so parametrizing
so this curve means introducing an
additional variable in such a way that
you can label all points which sit on
this curve by some value of this
additional parameter two ways to think
about it one is the time so think of
this as a trajectory of some point like
particle and this at each moment in time
it is somewhere a second way think of
this as a kind of as a rope so just this
you know this microphone wire I can take
you know I can cut a piece and I can
label you know I can interact say it's
going to be 1 1 yard and I so for each
point I know exactly the distance from
the one of the ends to this point right
so I parameterize this wire and then I
throw it on the plane well I can't throw
it
because it's vertical but I just put it
here and it's throw it like this so now
each point on the on the on the wire
which has a certain address which has
certain coordinate within the wire it's
going to be to my up somewhere on on the
plane right so in other words let me let
me let me draw it in other words so
here's my wire so it's going to be say
from 0 to 1 I could actually take as
long as I want
but let's say it's only 1 1 1 yard so I
can't really take more so each point
here has a certain coordinate let's say
t0 so let's say this point has
coordinates 0 I will think of this
interval as sitting on a line which had
coordinate C now I assume that it is
completely flexible like this wire and I
just throw it on this plane
ok what I would like mean by this well
this point home goes here this point
will go here each point for example this
one which I call T 0 we'll go somewhere
here so T 0 will go here so this will be
more generally this would be some a and
B if you want so this will a will go
here B will go here and hit your logo
here and so on right but now since I
threw it on the plane each of these
points is going to have an x-coordinate
which will be some expression of T 0 so
this is 0 got it just happen to be here
but when we look at it and say gee this
is a point on the plane so it has two
coordinates let's call it X 0 and y 0
but lg0 moves as the zero moves here
this two coordinates are going to change
so these are going to be two functions
of T 0 so then what I do is I just write
X is f of T
my gift and where T it goes goes between
a and that that that's called dramatic
representation of this cause is this
clear any questions so she said yes well
you see this this has become this way
it's like I take the piece of wire and I
just make it like this right now on this
interval I have a coordinate which I
call T which goes from A to B when I
throw it on the plane
for each value of ki I'm going to get a
pair of numbers which are the
coordinates x0 and y0 but when he
changes for g0 with any changes these
two coordinates are going to change
depending on T which I symbolically
write as a function of T for the first I
call it f and for the second I ecology
so I get this expression okay so that's
the idea that's right I had two
equations because I have two coordinates
but it's a node equation in this sense
right this was an equation which was a
constraint
I was constraining my variables x and y
and saying that they have to I only look
at points which satisfy this and I was
writing just one formula for that for
this right which he it involves only x
and y but no auxiliary variables but
here I have an opportunity variable and
by using this idea variable I write the
first and the second coordinate as a
function of of the tax rate available so
it's a different way of representation
but maybe it's better to look at a
concrete example to see how it works
okay so the example will be
[Music]
[Applause]
here's an example here's an example X is
equal to t minus 1 and y is equal to 3t
minus 2 ok so this is F and this is G in
other words I have written two formulas
just like this but I have chosen some
concrete functions F and G for it ok
first one is t minus 1 second 3 t minus
2 so question is what does it represent
so you can just approach it in a very
basic way in a very naive way and you
say alright professor you told us that
for each value of T I'm going to get a
point and what this formula tell me are
the coordinates of this point right so I
can we can just plot a few points for
example so the curve is going to be
somewhere we don't know yet what it is
but what we can try to do is just plot
some of the points and so what we can do
is we can just make this big diagram
which just make key x and y right so
let's say T equals 0 the point is going
to be negative 1 and negative 2 right
when T is 1 so going to be 0 and 1 these
two is going to be 1 and and what for
now I'm getting much slower this time
goes by
ok where I should know really good one
this is one hour one hour knock off just
kidding
so right so I've got I've got three
points I have found three points let's
plot them so for T equals zero is
negative one negative two this is one
let's call this a this is B this is C
okay so this is a so we don't know yet
what the curve is but we already know
one point on this curve second second
point is 0 1 this is 0 this is 1 so
that's D and the third point is when
this is 2 and this is 4 so maybe a
little longer it's 1 2 3 4 some like
this I'm sorry yes you're right I'm just
checking if you are awake and you are
some of you are as good perhaps more
than me so so this is 4 and this is the
point C ok so now it's tempting to say
so these are three points the same thing
to say that the curve itself is like
it's just this right so far is just a
guess right it's intuition because in
principle it could be okay like this
this point all this curve all both of
this curve share these three points so
so for now nothing nothing I have not
proved that this is it is this line
right so in other words this is a this
is a useful tool but it's very limited
it gives you an idea it can help you to
guess what the object is but just by
using this you cannot prove you cannot
say for sure what the object what the
curve is so say for sure what it is you
have to use more sophisticated method
what which in this case actually is not
very sophisticated but in general it can
become more complicated so what's what's
the method the method is you can try
there are several methods but one of
them is to try to eliminate this
variable in other words to try to
find the equation on X&Y so I gave you a
curve now in the parametric form which
is number two right this is number two
representation what you can try to do is
to rewrite it as number one a type one
representation by an equation how to do
this you can try to express this
auxiliary variable T in terms of X or Y
and then plug it in the other formula
okay so express T in terms of X or Y and
plug in the other form of so what does
it mean in this particular case well if
I exit t minus 1 that means that T is X
plus 1 and now I substitute this into
the second formula and what I obtain is
that Y is equal to 3 times X plus 1
minus 2 which means 3x plus 1 so the end
result of this is that Y is equal to 3x
plus y so you see we start out with a
parametric representation but we ended
up with an equation like this or like
that because we have been able to
express Y as a function of X and now of
course we recognize this because this is
the graph this is already graph will
function one variable so to understand
what this is you don't need to study
multivariable calculus it's enough to
study single variable calculus because
it's a graph of a function in one
variable and what is it it's a line
right it's a line which has a slope 3
and we actually we actually see it so
the first guess was actually correct it
is a line with slope 3
right but this is a proof because we
reduced this problem the problem
describing this curve to something we
already know because we know from the
previous class that when you have a
linear function in other word in other
words a function which only involves X
and the scalar but not x squared and so
on and neither does it involve any more
complicate functions then the graph is a
line and we can easily draw that line
because you know a line as soon as you
know two points on this line in fact
here we know three points on this line
so it's even better because we can also
test ourselves whether we got those
points correctly
clear in questions all right
so by the way you can so you can see it
kind of interplay between single
variable and and a multi variable and it
sort of comes a little bit of a surprise
because here it's really about a
function one variable and yet we
obtained a graph which lives in two
dimensions there's very simple reason
for this even if we study functions in
one variable when we want to talk about
a graph of this function we have to talk
not not only about the argument of the
function but also the value of the
function so implicitly there are two
variables already once we start talking
about functions in one variable
they're already two variables involved
one is the actual variable add on which
the function depends but then the
results the second variable we can think
of which represents the value that's why
the graph will function in two in one
variable actually is going to be a curve
which which lives on the plane so in
some sense you already have some
elements over multivariable calculus
when you studied single variable
calculus okay and likewise when we will
talk about function in two variables
function in two variables to really
understand them properly we will have to
introduce throw in one more variable a
third variable for example graph will
function two variables is going to be
surface in three dimensions okay so so
it's good to keep track of all of this
in other words there are different
things there's like independent
variables there are a number of
equations there are three parameters
there are also graphs we
somehow bump everything dimensions Oh
buy one for the engine space so it's
important portent to keep this clear in
mind like which which are we talking
about we talking about function of how
many variables are we talking about the
graph of this function and things like
that
all right another example a little bit
more complicated but basically the same
in the same vein alright second example
this was one this is example 2 okay X is
equal to 2 minus 1 but why now is equal
to T squared minus T so same idea again
Express T in terms of X X plus 1 and
substitute in this formula right so what
you get is X plus 1 squared minus 2
times X plus 1 minus 1 x squared plus 2
X plus 1 minus 2 X minus 2 minus 1 and
that's what that's x squared minus 2
plus so let's eliminate this women like
this
so we end up with y equals x squared
minus 2 which again is a graph of a
well-known function
which is called parabola okay so for a
bola if we had it like this it would be
parabola parabola would be like this but
because we have minus 2 we have to shift
everything by 2 so instead of this
picture
we'll have picture starting at minus 2
negative 2 so so it's going to be for
example the next one will be negative 1
so only 1 and then here will be like 2
so it's something like this ok
does it look familiar I hope my drawing
is okay so this is called parabola right
so again the same idea now let's let's
play with this a little bit suppose that
I wrote I switch the variables suppose I
write X is T squared minus 2t minus 1
okay and Y is equal to commands suppose
I write the same thing but I'd switch
X&Y
I'm allowed to write any functions
whatsoever in fact you're lucky I'm
writing this I could write some
logarithms and exponential functions and
then what I going to do right so I can
write but I'd start I like I said I
start with simple example but here's a
little twist I just switch the water
switch the regular two variables so now
X is a complicated function but why the
simple function now we've learned the
three cloud to deal with this kind of
parametric curves and the trick was to
express T in terms of X and then
substitute but in this particular case
that would be unwise because the formula
for T would be if I try to explain
Express T in terms of X would be very
complicated would involve square roots
and so we don't want to do that right
instead it's much wiser to use the
second formula to eliminate T so we
write G is equal to y plus 1 and then we
substitute in here ok so then what I end
up with its way I don't have to
calculate the second time I just take
the formula I had before and I switch x
and y so what I end up with is x equals
y squared minus 1
but see here - - so see here I had y
equals x squared minus 2 and I said this
is great this is the graph of the
function x squared minus 2 so what I got
now is not really a graph of a function
in the usual sense because usually we
write the formula for a graphical
function by writing y equals f of X it's
not in this form because I could try to
express Y in terms of X but I would get
like square roots and things like that
which I prefer noted not to have but we
should not we should not insist on a
curve being a graph of a function
because before we looked at graphs of
functions because we were interested
only in functions in one variable so the
only curve on the plane that we could
possibly get this way or curve like this
y equals f of X but now we've grown we
we look at general curves in the
two-dimensional space we are actually
the variables x and y become equal we
could not say that x is more important
than Y or conversely so so this should
present no problem for us because even
if it's not a graph of a function it's
very clear what the curve is because we
got this curve just by exchanging x and
y so what does it mean geometrically
exchanging x and y simply mean the flip
with respect to this this diagonal right
if I flip what do I get I get exactly
the same kind of thing but it's now
aligned like this it starts at negative
2 but now in x coordinate and it will
also have points like 1 negative 1 and
negative 1 1 right and we just go like
this
so this is precisely the mirror image of
that curve with respect to that diagonal
and it's no more complicated than this
but this is a good illustration of the
fact of how more more general our curves
are now than they were before
we don't insist anymore that
would look like this but we also allow
things like this and you should be open
to kind of playing with X&Y as if they
were completely independent not trying
to necessarily fit the same profile as y
equals f of X but for instance also
allow X equals F of Y okay is that clear
so let's do a slightly more complicated
example how about this let's write X is
a cosine of T and Y is a sine okay so as
I said in principle we can use any
functions whatsoever I could write some
really ugly functions and it will be a
bonified a curve of course in general is
going to be very difficult to to draw it
to plot it you can plot some points and
the next week we will talk about other
methods which will give you a better
idea
kind of quality of ideas at least about
the what the picture looks like because
we will also talk about tangent lines
what tangent lines look like so we have
have a bunch of tools tricks and tools
which would allow us to get some
understanding of what this curves look
in general look like in general but in
these simple examples actually we can we
can somehow see the whole thing right
and for instance here how do we see the
whole thing well the point is the point
is that these two functions cosine and
sine satisfy very simple equation right
which we know from trigonometry we know
this cosine squared plus sine squared is
equal to 1 right so we can use it to our
advantage
so we can say that this is exactly this
is equivalent to this equation and we
already discussed the fact that this
equation represents a circle so in other
words we start with this parametric
representation and we end up with this
equation so these are two equivalent
forms over presenting the circle however
there is a small caveat there is a small
faculty here which is something which I
haven't really kind of emphasized up to
now but now I haven't been forced to do
it because remember when I talked about
the most general setup remember when I
wrote the formula for a general curve I
said I said the general curve is like
parameterizing a curve by segments and
the segment has two ends a and B right
so when I roll general general formula
when I wrote so it I'm switching action
wide I also wrote this for a and D at
some numbers so you have to remember
this because if you are given this in
the discussion up to now I was not
paying attention because I never wrote
any limits and if you don't write any
limits by default it means that it it
can take an arbitrary value in other
words in the example of this parabola I
didn't write any any limits right and so
what I'm talking about is the entire
parabola the entire parabola is
parametrized if you will by P going from
minus infinity to plus infinity if
however you are doing homework and in
the homework it says he goes from
negative 1 to 1 you don't draw the
parabola you only draw the part of the
parabola which corresponds to the values
of T between these two limits and what
is it well
40 equals negative one that that's what
so that it's - okay C equals negative
one let's do let's do it inside like we
did before right so I see I don't have
the answer right away and I had to count
so so you have minus one so you have 1
plus 2 minus 1 right that's 2 & 4 why
it's a it's negative 2 right so X is 2
and Y is negative 2 right it's this
point now everything this which goes
which is on this side is going to have
key less than negative 1 so I raise it
right and likewise next I would I look
at T equal T equal 1 so that would be
what 1 minus 2 minus 1 so that's
negative 2 right and if i put t go on
here is zero so it's this point so if
I'm told to look only at the parametric
curve for this limit it means that I
only look at this part this is this is
what I have to draw this is what I
should look at okay now let's see how
this plays out in the case of the circle
I was a little bit Cavalier when I said
but this formulas just represent a
circle right the point is that let's say
if you start from T equals 0 for T
equals 0 you get this point right and as
you increase T you probably I hope you
remember from trigonometry that X is
going to decrease and Y is going to
increase and for example here you reach
this point when T is PI over 2 you reach
this point when T is PI you reach this
point when he is
three PI over two and you come back here
when T is equal to two pi if you
continue to increase your variable T you
will actually start making a second
round second circle and so on so you're
actually going to wrap around the circle
infinitely many times right so it's not
correct to say that this is equivalent
to this what is correct is to say that
if if I impose the condition the T is
between 0 and 2pi and this is really
equivalent to the circle likewise if I
would if you want I can also say alpha
plus 2 pi for any Alpha that would also
correspond to this but if for example I
say if I if I say that T is for example
from 0 to 4 pi it's not just a circle
but it's our curve is not just the
circle our curve is obtained by wrapping
around the circle twice if it's four by
six foot one foot six pi 3 times and so
on down to clockwise right so you have
to be aware of this that parametric
curve actually gives you more
flexibility because parametric curve for
example allows you to go through the
same point twice and even through the
same curve twice or three times or
infinitely many times we have to be
careful when you when you start
converting these parametric equations
into this sort of more conventional
equations relating X and y you have to
be careful to keep track of what the
limits are any questions about this yes
in other words what is the dimension of
parabola and what is the dimension of
the circle also one that's why we call
them curves right so circle is one
dimensional and parabola is one
dimensional right and I know that it
sounds it could sound a little bit int
intuitive right because you may think
one could think that one dimension is
like a line but as soon as it becomes
curved right it's it's somehow more than
a line right but see the point is the
point here is not that we have to let me
backtrack the point is to separate two
things to separate our geometric object
from the ambient space where it lives a
circle lives wonderfully in the plane
right it is embedded into a plane but
the plane is not a circle applying is
the ambient space it's like it's home
but it lives there but it doesn't mean
that the circle is two-dimensional
dimensionality is the measure not of the
dimension of the ambient space it's the
measure of how many independent
variables you have within your object in
this particular case we were able to
parameterize the entire circle but one
by one variable namely variable C for
each value for each value of T from 0 to
2pi we got one and only one point on the
circle well more precisely for 0 and 2pi
we get the same point but that's not
working right so in other words we have
been able to there is we have been able
to identify the circle with an interval
from 0 to 2pi and that's what
parameterization is all about it's about
mapping or establishing a correspondence
or mantra proper mat makhotin would be
one-to-one correspondence between your
curve and an interval now the interval
clearly is one dimensional and when we
make this procedure we identify this
interval with the circle each point here
goes to one and only one point here so
that's the reason why we say that this
is also one dimensional and more
concretely this is what is expressed by
this formula because we say that both x
and y coordinates are expressed in terms
of key right
that's why it's one-dimensional put a
different way these are nodes all
possible values of x and y but only
values of x and y which satisfy this
equation in other words they're two
independent variables x and y but there
is one constraint so the rule is a
number of independence - number of
equations that works in well almost
always works but it's a good rule so in
in all the situations we'll consider it
will work
you see Raymond yeah any other yeah
direction of the graph so the question
is yeah I have to repeat it for the
worldwide audience the question is about
the direction of the graph this is a
very good point so in fact here as Z
increases from 0 to 2pi this is
traversing the the circle
counterclockwise right if for example i
made a change if i wrote like negative
key for example it would go clockwise so
in principle if we have to if we want to
be really pedantic and i guess we should
be at this i mean why not right it
should be you we have to specify also
which in which direction does does the
this parameter traverse the curve for
example this case would be this way with
negative sign it will be this way
likewise here it was this way right
because negative 1 correspond it to this
point and 1 corresponding to this point
so clearly we were moving this way so to
the enter yes you should you should keep
track of this as well anything else okay
so now let's do one more and I think
time is up oh because
let's look at this permutation okay if
key so if he become if key is positive
9050 is negative and the negative angle
look respond to this removing like this
right this is minus five or two for
negative PI over two or so on now I know
that I know that the lecture is almost
over okay
and everybody wants to get get out of
here right now I will not keep you more
than you have to be here I promise that
five o'clock it's over you know even in
mid-sentence but if we start thinking
about leaving now five minutes before
it's not going to help because people
start putting stuff and you know moving
and so then it means that the lecture is
not 50 minutes but it's 45 minutes okay
so that might as well finish at five
minutes before but then of course you'll
start even five minutes before and so on
so that that's by the way this is a
mathematical argument now so to avoid
this I would like to ask you not to not
to mean well not to make any unusual
movement she will normally do in other
words act in the same way be between the
beginning of the lecture and the end of
the lesson
only when it's finished then you pick is
that okay it's just a simple request as
we are many people and just this will
help everybody all right so we have one
more example and then we'll I let you go
ah maybe let me just do a small
variation on this I already did one so I
put negative sign here's another
variation how about I put one half here
if I put one half here this will not be
true anymore because if I take x squared
I will get 1/4 of cosine squared right
but there is a very simple way to
compensate for this
let's take 4x squared if I take 4x
squared is going to be 4 times 1 1 over
4 so that's again cosine squared and
everybody's happy so that means the
origin becomes 4x squared plus y squared
equals 1 and what does it represent well
we have what we have to do is we have to
just stretch everything along the
x-direction by a factor of 2 because
well 2 is because of this this this 1/2
that's right sorry I meant shrinking
shrinking everything by a factor of Pi
factors 2 because of this 1/2 so what
it's going to look like is that it will
now cross the X line at the point 1/2
and negative 1/2 but the Y line y axis
it will still cross at negative 1 and 1
and so it will do it will look like this
and that's something which is called an
ellipse so you see this is not a circle
but it's very similar to a circle and we
use our intuition our gained knowledge
about the circle namely that we knew
what this was to represent this curve
because we see that geometrically this
is going to be like a circle but it's
just squished by or shrunk by by a
factor of 2 okay good so now just in the
remaining two minutes I will begin and I
will let you finish it on your own
sometimes you are you're going to be
asked to to write the parametric
representation for a curve which is
described in a different way in words
for example in other words you some 20
people will say people will tell you or
in the book when you do the homework
assignment you will see a description of
a curve and you will have to represent
that curve in a parametric form and here
is a very typical example which is
called which is called secluded
so this is a curve which you obtain in
the following way you take a circle of
radius 1 so this is 1 right ok and or or
think of it disk if you like and you put
it here it's like a wheel think of it as
a wheel and then you have a marked point
this is one point here which is now at
the bottom which is now exactly at the
origin of this coordinate system and
then rotate it to the right in a roll it
roll it to the right think of it as a
wheel and just roll it to the right and
let's see what happens with this point
look at the trajectory of this point so
this is a very nice example because I
was telling you that one of the ways to
think about primary curves is to think
that there is a point particle which is
moving and as it moves it sweeps a
trajectory and that's your parametric
curve right and so what happen is that
it will go something like this sorry
that's not acceptable because to reach
at some point it will reach the highest
level then it will come back and then it
will do the same thing we repeat the
same trajectory many times right so
qualitatively it will look like this but
now you have to write a formula or more
precisely two formulas you have to write
eggs and the funk of T and y as a
function of T right so that's what you
need to do and so this is actually
example it's a good example it is in the
book and I will just give you a hint the
first hint is to decide what is a good
executive parameter so when the circle
moves let's say it moves this way so
then the point could be good the point
could be somewhere here become somewhere
here right and so
so the question is which parameter
you're going to use and so in this
particular case the good parameter is
the angle of rotation by what by how
much has the wheel turned and then after
this it's a simple tech anomaly to find
the coordinates x and y of this point as
a function of that coordinate so that
two parts right you for first find a
good coordinate which in this case is
angle and second you use some methods
like the denominator to express the x
and y as a function as functions of this
coordinate that's how you do it okay
that's all for today and we'll continue
next time